---
title: The Internet Layer
---

# The Internet layer

## Network settings

The Internet layer is responsible for routing of network traffic between any hosts on the network. In order to be able to communicate, each host should have *three* settings configured correctly:

1. The network interface should have an **IP address** assigned
2. A **default gateway** should be set
3. A **DNS server** should be set

Before "reaching out" to other hosts, first check local settings.

### IP address

#### Configuration

The IP address may have been set automatically (DHCP), or manually. Check this in `/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-IFACE`, with IFACE the name of the network interface.

This is an exerpt from a network interface configuration file configured to use DHCP:

```
DEVICE="enp0s3"
ONBOOT="yes"
BOOTPROTO="dhcp"
```

Things to check:

- `DEVICE` should be the interface name
- `ONBOOT` should be `yes`, or the interface will not attempt to activate the interface on boot, or when restarting the network interfaces (`systemctl restart network`)
- `BOOTPROTO` should be set to `dhcp`

If a fixed IP address is set, the configuration should look like this:

```
DEVICE=enp0s8
ONBOOT=yes
BOOTPROTO=none
IPADDR=192.168.56.24
NETMASK=255.255.255.0
```

- `DEVICE` and `ONBOOT` like in the previous example
- `BOOTPROTO` should be `none`
- `IPADDR` and `NETMASK` must be specified

#### Actual value

Use the command `ip address` (or shortcut `ip a`) to list the IP addresses for each interface.

You should know the expected value: if not the exact IP, at least the network range or network IP and network mask.

- Many home routers have an IP range of 192.168.0.0/24, 192.168.1.0/24
- On a VirtualBox NAT interface, the IP address of the VM should be 10.0.2.15/24
- On a VirtualBox host-only interface, the IP address of the VM depends on how you configured this network. The *default* host only network has IP range 192.168.56.0/24, with a DHCP server handing out addresses starting at 192.168.56.101.

Possible problems and causes (automatic IP assignment with DHCP):

- No IP
    - The DHCP server is unreachable
    - The DHCP server won't give an IP to this host
- IP looking like 169.254.x.x
    - No DHCP server could be reached, and a "link-local" address was assigned
- IP not in the expected range
    - You may have accidentally set a fixed IP previously, and forgot to set it to DHCP again...

Possible problems and causes (manual IP setting):

- IP not in the expected range
    - Mistake in IP address assignment, check the configuration file
- Correct IP, but "network unreachable"
    - Check the network mask, this should be identical for all hosts on the LAN

### Default gateway

Usually, a host is connected to a LAN through a switch. Network traffic to the outside world goes through a router, connected to the same LAN. Every host on the LAN should know this router, the "default gateway".

Use the command `ip route` (or shortcut `ip r`). There should be a line starting with `default via x.y.z.w`.

Possible problems and causes (automatic IP assignment with DHCP):

- No default gateway set
    - there is most probably also a problem with the IP address of this host, fix this first
    - If you manage the DHCP server, maybe it's configured badly?
- Unexpected default gateway address
    - You may have accidentally set the default gateway manually previously and forgot to set it to DHCP again
    - If you manage the DHCP server, maybe it's configured badly?

### DNS server

In order to be able to resolve host names to IP addresses, every host should be able to contact a DNS server. View the file `/etc/resolv.conf`. It usually has a header that mentions it was generated automatically, and should have one or more lines starting with `nameserver`.

```console
$ cat /etc/resolv.conf
# Generated by NetworkManager
search hogent.be
nameserver 193.190.173.1
nameserver 193.190.173.2
```

Possible problems and causes are equivalent to those with the default gateway setting.

## Check LAN connectivity

If the previous settings are correct, you can check whether other hosts on the LAN can be reached.

### Reaching other hosts on the LAN

- Ping the default gateway: `ping a.b.c.d`
- Ping another known host on the LAN

A command like `ping www.google.com` (for some the first command they try in case of network connection problems) is not very suitable, in that it depends on too many things to work at once:

- the host's network settings should be correct
- routing should work
- DNS should be available
- no router between this host and the target should block ICMP
- ...

**Be aware** that `ping` (and other network troubleshooting tools like the `traceroute` family) may not always work. Some system administrators will block ICMP traffic on routers, rendering the results useless.

A Windows sytem may also block ICMP traffic (including `ping`). Be sure to check the firewall settings and if necessary, allow this type of network traffic. The following PowerShell one-liner does exactly that:

```powershell
Get-NetFirewallRule -DisplayName "*Echo Request*" | Set-NetFirewallRule -enabled true
```

### Check DNS name resolution

Having a DNS server configured in `/etc/resolv.conf` does not necessarily mean that the service is actually available. Check this with e.g. the commands `nslookup` or `dig` (in the package `bind-utils`).

```console
$ dig www.google.com +short
216.58.213.196
$ nslookup www.google.com
Server:		193.190.173.1
Address:	193.190.173.1#53

Non-authoritative answer:
Name:	www.google.com
Address: 216.58.213.228
Name:	www.google.com
Address: 2a00:1450:4013:c04::67
```

You can query a specific DNS server (instead of the default one specified in `/etc/resolv.conf`) by passing it as an argument:

```console
$ dig www.google.com @8.8.8.8 +short
216.58.211.100
$ nslookup www.google.com 8.8.8.8
Server:		8.8.8.8
Address:	8.8.8.8#53

Non-authoritative answer:
Name:	www.google.com
Address: 172.217.19.196
Name:	www.google.com
Address: 2a00:1450:400e:809::2004
```

If `nslookup` or `dig` are not available, and installing `bind-utils` is not an option, use `getent ahosts`:

```console
$ getent ahosts www.google.com
216.58.213.196  STREAM www.google.com
216.58.213.196  DGRAM  
216.58.213.196  RAW    
2a00:1450:4013:c04::67 STREAM 
2a00:1450:4013:c04::67 DGRAM  
2a00:1450:4013:c04::67 RAW 
```
